In The Bazaars of Hyderabad
Sarojini Naidu
What do you sell O ye merchants?
Richly your wares are displayed.
Turbans of crimson and silver,
Tunics of purple brocade,
Mirrors with panels of amber,
Daggers with handles of jade.
What do you weigh, O ye vendors?
Saffron and lentil and rice.
What do you grind, O ye maidens?
Sandalwood, henna, and spice.
What do you call, O ye pedlars?
Chessmen and ivory dice.
What do you make, O ye goldsmiths?
Wristlet and anklet and ring,
Bells for the feet of blue pigeons
Frail as a dragon-fly’s wing,
Girdles of gold for dancers,
Scabbards of gold for the king.
What do you cry, O ye fruitmen?
Citron, pomegranate, and plum.
What do you play, O musicians?
Cithar, sarangi and drum.
What do you chant, O magicians?
Spells for aeons to come.
What do you weave, O ye flower-girls
With tassels of azure and red?
Crowns for the brow of a bridegroom,
Chaplets to garland his bed.
Sheets of white blossoms new-garnered
To perfume the sleep of the dead. 






హైదరాబాద్ బజారుల్లో
సరోజిని నాయుడు

మేర్చంటారా ఓ వ్యాపారులు?
భద్రంగా మీ వస్తువులు ప్రదర్శించబడుతున్నాయి.
కప్పు వర్ణంలో ఉడమాలు మరియు వెండ్లాలు,
తాంబల నిలాల ట్యూనిక్లు,
మాంబర్ పానెల్స్ కలదిలో మీర్రర్లు,
జేడ్ హ్యాండిల్స్ తో కత్తీలు.
ఏమినా కాకుండా మీరు పరిశీలిస్తున్నారు, ఓ వ్యాపారులు?
కుంకుమ మరియు పప్పు మరియు రైస్.
ఏమి తయారు చేస్తారు, ఓ కన్నీరులు?
సందల్వుడ్, హెన్నా, మరియు మసాలా.
ఏమితో పిల్లలు, ఓ వేచీకారులు?
చెస్మెన్నులు మరియు ఐవరీ డైస్.
ఏమి తయారు చేస్తారు, ఓ గోల్డ్స్మిత్స్?
కైలుకట్టు మరియు గోజులు మరియు అంగూటలు,
నీలి పాతాల పదమరాలకు బెల్లాలు,
పొడుగుగా ఉంటే పక్షుల వేడుకలకు,
రాజుకి గోల్డ్ స్కాబర్డ్లు.
ఏమి అరచుకున్నారు, ఓ పండగలు మేసర్స్?
నింబు, దాళించాడు, మరియు రెగ్గెలు.
ఏమి ప్లే చేస్తారు, ఓ సంగీతకారులు?
సితార్, సారంగీ మరియు డ్రం.
ఏమి పాడుతున్నారు, ఓ మాయాజాలికులు?
ముసుకులు మరియు ముసుకులు వచ్చే స్పెల్స్.
ఏమి అటుకున్నారు, ఓ పుష్పాలు-పని పట్టులు?
నీలం మరియు ఎరుపు ఫ్రింజులతో?
జోడులు వాడుకున్నారు, గోండ






================================================================



THE THREE QUESTIONS
Leo Tolstoy
IT ONCE OCCURRED to a certain king, that if he always knew the right time to begin
everything; if he knew who were the right people to listen to, and whom to avoid, and,
above all, if he always knew what was the most important thing to do, he would never
fail in anything he might undertake.
And this thought having occurred to him, he had it proclaimed throughout his kingdom
that he would give a great reward to anyone who would teach him what was the right
time for every action, and who were the most necessary people, and how he might
know what was the most important thing to do.
And learned men came to the King, but they all answered his questions differently.
In reply to the first question, some said that to know the right time for every action, one
must draw up in advance, a table of days, months and years, and must live strictly
according to it. Only thus, said they, could everything be done at its proper time. Others
declared that it was impossible to decide beforehand the right time for every action;
but that, not letting oneself be absorbed in idle pastimes, one should always attend to
all that was going on, and then do what was most needful. Others, again, said that
however attentive the King might be to what was going on, it was impossible for one
man to decide correctly the right time for every action, but that he should have a Council
of wise men, who would help him to fix the proper time for everything.
But then again others said there were some things which could not wait to be laid before
a Council, but about which one had at once to decide whether to undertake them or
not. But in order to decide that one must know beforehand what was going to happen.
It is only magicians who know that; and, therefore in order to know the right time for
every action, one must consult magicians.
Equally various were the answers to the second question. Some said, the people the
King most needed were his councillors; others, the priests; others, the doctors; while
some said the warriors were the most necessary. To the third question, as to what was
the most important occupation: some replied that the most important thing in the
world was science. Others said it was skill in warfare; and others, again, that it was
religious worship.
All the answers being different, the King agreed with none of them, and gave the reward
to none. But still wishing to find the right answers to his questions, he decided to consult
a hermit, widely renowned for his wisdom.
The hermit lived in a wood which he never quitted and he received none but common
folk. So the King put on simple clothes, and before reaching the hermit’s cell
dismounted from his horse, and, leaving his bodyguard behind, went on alone.
When the King approached, the hermit was digging the ground in front of his hut. Seeing
the King, he greeted him and went on digging. The hermit was frail and weak, and each
time he stuck his spade into the ground and turned a little earth, he breathed heavily.
The King went up to him and said: ‘I have come to you, wise hermit, to ask you to answer
three questions: How can I learn to do the right thing at the right time? Who are the
people I most need, and to whom should I, therefore, pay more attention than to the
rest? And, what affairs are the most important and need my first attention?’
The hermit listened to the King, but answered nothing. He just spat on his hand and
recommenced digging. ‘You are tired,’ said the King, ‘let me take the spade and work
awhile for you.’
‘Thanks!’ said the hermit, and, giving the spade to the King, he sat down on the ground.
When he had dug two beds, the King stopped and repeated his questions. The hermit
again gave no answer, but rose, stretched out his hand for the spade, and said:
‘Now rest awhile — and let me work a bit.’
But the King did not give him the spade, and continued to dig. One hour passed, and
another. The sun began to sink behind the trees, and the King at last stuck the spade
into the ground, and said: ‘I came to you, wise man, for an answer to my questions. If
you can give me none, tell me so, and I will return home.’
‘Here comes someone running,’ said the hermit, ‘let us see who it is.’
The King turned round, and saw a bearded man come running out of the wood. The
man held his hands pressed against his stomach, and blood was flowing from under
them. When he reached the King, he fell fainting on the ground moaning feebly. The
King and the hermit unfastened the man’s clothing. There was a large wound in his
stomach. The King washed it as best he could, and bandaged it with his handkerchief
and with a towel the hermit had. But the blood would not stop flowing, and the King
again and again removed the bandage soaked with warm blood, and washed and
rebandaged the wound.
When at last the blood ceased flowing, the man revived and asked for something to
drink. The King brought fresh water and gave it to him. Meanwhile the sun had set, and
it had become cool. So the King, with the hermit’s help, carried the wounded man into
the hut and laid him on the bed. Lying on the bed the man closed his eyes and was quiet;
but the King was so tired with his walk and with the work he had done, that he crouched
down on the threshold, and also fell asleep — so soundly that he slept all through the
short summer night. When he awoke in the morning, it was long be- fore he could
remember where he was, or who was the strange bearded man lying on the bed and
gazing intently at him with shining eyes.
‘Forgive me!’ said the bearded man in a weak voice, when he saw that the King was
awake and was looking at him.
‘I do not know you, and have nothing to forgive you for,’ said the King.
‘You do not know me, but I know you. I am that enemy of yours who swore to revenge
himself on you, because you executed his brother and seized his property. I knew you
had gone alone to see the hermit, and I resolved to kill you on your way back. But the
day passed and you did not return. So I came out from my ambush to find you, and I
came upon your bodyguard, and they recognized me, and wounded me. I escaped from
them, but should have bled to death had you not dressed my wound. I wished to kill
you, and you have saved my life. Now, if I live, and if you wish it, I will serve you as your
most faithful slave, and will bid my sons do the same. Forgive me!’
The King was very glad to have made peace with his enemy so easily, and to have
gained him for a friend, and he not only forgave him, but said he would send his servants
and his own physician to attend him, and promised to restore his property.
Having taken leave of the wounded man, the King went out into the porch and looked
around for the hermit. Before going away he wished once more to beg an answer to the
questions he had put. The hermit was outside, on his knees, sowing seeds in the beds
that had been dug the day before.
The King approached him, and said: ‘For the last time, I pray you to answer my
questions, wise man.’
‘You have already been answered!’ said the hermit still crouching on his thin legs, and
looking up at the King, who stood before him.
‘How answered? What do you mean?’ asked the King. ‘Do you not see,’ replied the
hermit. ‘If you had not pitied my weakness yesterday, and had not dug these beds for
me, but had gone your way, that man would have attacked you, and you would have
repented of not having stayed with me.
So the most important time was when you were digging the beds; and I was the most
important man; and to do me good was your most important business. Afterwards,
when that man ran to us, the most important time was when you were attending to
him, for if you had not bound up his wounds, he would have died without having made
peace with you. So he was the most important man, and what you did for him was your
most important business. Remember then: there is only one time that is important —
Now! It is the most important time because it is the only time when we have any power.
The most necessary man is he with whom you are, for no man knows whether he will
ever have dealings with anyone else: and the most important affair is, to do him good,
because for that purpose alone was man sent into this life!’ 1903.

మూడు ప్రశ్నలు
లియో టాల్‌స్టాయ్
ఇది ఒకసారి ఒక నిర్దిష్ట రాజుకు సంభవించింది, అతను ఎల్లప్పుడూ ప్రారంభించడానికి సరైన సమయం తెలిస్తే
ప్రతిదీ; వినడానికి సరైన వ్యక్తులు ఎవరు, మరియు ఎవరిని నివారించాలో అతనికి తెలిస్తే, మరియు,
అన్నింటికంటే ముఖ్యంగా, చేయవలసిన ముఖ్యమైన విషయం ఏమిటో అతనికి ఎల్లప్పుడూ తెలిస్తే, అతను ఎప్పటికీ చేయడు
అతను చేపట్టే ఏదైనా విఫలం.
మరియు ఈ ఆలోచన అతనికి సంభవించినందున, అతను దానిని తన రాజ్యమంతటా ప్రకటించాడు
తనకు నేర్పించే ఎవరికైనా గొప్ప బహుమతి ఇస్తానని






