Trees are the greatest gift to life on earth. Much has already been said about this and I want to reiterate the fact that by closing carbon dioxide in their roots, woods, and leaves, the trees serve as carbon sinks. In our climate, this carbon is not so abundant, which can destroy it. Trees act as windmills. 


The trees planted on the edge actually serve as a windbreaker during cold and windy weather conditions. An airflow will reduce the heating bills of our house to a great degree by up to 30 percent and reduce snow droplets effectively. The soil is preserved by the roots of the trees and their leaves break the power of the air and reduce the impact of rain on the soil. 


Thus, trees face soil erosion, hold rainwater, and keep an eye on sediment deposits and water runoff during storms. Ultimately, I just want to conclude that trees are good for humanity and that they are the true protectors of humanity. They nourish us and our lives are maintained. We should therefore ensure their protection and put them in abundance.


10 Lines for Speech on Importance of Trees in Human Life in English
Trees are the pillars for sustaining life on earth.

Trees consume carbon dioxide and, by photosynthesis, emit oxygen.

By holding the soil to its roots, also assists in reducing soil erosion.

Trees absorb atmospheric carbon and store it in their wood and bark, thus slowing the rate of global warming.

Forests contribute to the growth of wildlife and provide refuge for thousands of animals, including humans.

Trees supply fruit, a food source for birds, animals, and humans.

They are also the key source of raw materials for the timber and paper industries.

There are also medicinal properties in many trees and they are used in the healthcare industry. 

They shield us from harmful UV rays, which can cause skin cancer.

We are safeguarding the lives of our future generations by planting trees.


Tree Importance and Value
Trees have provided humanity with two of life's necessities, food, and oxygen, from the beginning. They offered additional requirements like shelter, medicine, and tools as humanity progressed. Today, their importance is increasing, and new advantages of trees are being found as their function extends to meet the demands of our contemporary lifestyles.


Community and Social Importance
Trees are an essential feature of every society. Trees surround our streets, parks, playgrounds, and backyards, creating a tranquil, visually beautiful atmosphere. Trees improve our quality of life by introducing natural features and animal habitats into urban areas. During outdoor activities, we congregate beneath the cool shade they give with family and friends. Many communities also have very ancient trees that act as historic markers and a source of community pride. The use of trees to deflect sunlight in cities minimises the heat island effect created by pavement and commercial buildings.


Ecological and Environmental Importance
Trees benefit the environment by producing oxygen, improving air quality, reducing climate change, saving water, maintaining soil, and providing habitat for wildlife. Trees absorb carbon dioxide and create oxygen during the photosynthesis process. "One acre of forest absorbs six tonnes of carbon dioxide and emits four tonnes of oxygen," according to the United States Department of Agriculture. This is enough to fulfil the requirements of 18 individuals for a year." Trees, bushes, and turf also filter the air by absorbing pollutants such as carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide. Rain washes harmful particles to the ground after trees intercept them.


Trees influence climate by reducing the impacts of the sun, rain, and wind. In the summer, leaves absorb and screen the sun's radiant energy, keeping things cool. Trees can help to keep heat in by acting as a windbreak. They not only influence wind speed and direction, but they also protect us from rain, sleet, and hail. By maintaining low levels of carbon dioxide, trees help lower air temperature and lessen the heat intensity of the greenhouse effect.


Trees are vital to the eco-systems in which they live, both above and below ground. Long-reaching roots help to keep soil in place and prevent erosion. Trees absorb and retain rainwater, reducing runoff and sediment accumulation after storms. This helps recharge the groundwater supply, inhibits chemical transmission into streams, and avoids flooding. Fallen leaves produce great compost that improves soil fertility.


Many animals, including elephants, koalas, and giraffes, feed on leaves. Monkeys consume flowers, and nectar is a favourite of birds, bats, and many insects. Animals consume a lot of the same fruits that people do. This technique aids in the dispersal of seeds across long distances. Of course, trees are home to hundreds of living animals. Many species, such as birds and squirrels, are kept safe from predators by leaf-covered branches.


Trees help chronicle your family's history as they grow and develop with you and your children. We frequently form emotional attachments to the trees we plant or get particularly attracted to the ones we see every day. The hundreds of groups and organisations around the country that go to considerable efforts to conserve and save exceptionally large or historic trees from the perils of contemporary development demonstrate these deep relationships. How many of your early memories involve trees in your backyard or in your old neighbourhood? A specific tree's emotive significance is just incalculable.


Commercial and Practical Value
Throughout human existence, trees have supported and maintained life. They have a wide range of practical and commercial applications. Wood was the earliest fuel, and it is still used for cooking and heating by almost half of the world's population. Timber from trees is used to make building materials, furniture, tools, athletic equipment, and hundreds of household products. Paper is made from wood pulp.


Economic Value and Property Value
Individual trees and shrubs have value and contribute to savings, but it is the combined influence of a well-maintained landscape that has the biggest economic impact and affects property value. Energy cost savings provide direct economic advantages. When a tree serves as a windbreak, cooling expenses are decreased and heating expenditures are reduced. "Trees correctly positioned around buildings may cut air conditioning demands by 30 percent and save 20-50 percent in energy required for heating," according to the USDA Forest Service.

